## Generate a random list of unique numbers

Suppose you want to pick a few numbers from a range, but you don't want any
repeats.

Use the `shuffle` function to put the numbers in random order, then take as
many as you need:

```shuffle(0..10)[0..3]```

[See this in action](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/question/20932/randomly-pick-a-list-of-unique-numbers/)


---

## Picking two different numbers

Generate two distinct numbers with the `except` operation:

* `a = random(1..10)`
* `b = random(1..10 except a)`

`b` will be chosen from the numbers in the range 1 to 10, excluding the chosen
value of `a`.

[See an example](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/question/53647/generate-two-distinct-numbers-neither-of-which-is-zero/)

---

## Try the quantities extension

The 'quantities' extension adds the ability to work with quantities with
associated units.

You can do arithmetic with quantities:

`qty(10,"kg") / qty(5,"m^3") = qty(2,"kg/m^3")`

The 'quantity with units' part type lets you ask the student to include units
with their answer.

[Read about the quantities extension](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/extensions/55/documentation)

---

## Want the answer box somewhere else?

For most part types, the answer input is underneath the prompt.
If you want it to appear somewhere in the middle of the prompt, make it a
gap-fill by clicking the "Replace with a gap-fill" button.

[More about gap-fill parts](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/gapfill.html)

---

## Illustrate your questions

It's easy to add images to your questions.
Click the "Insert/Edit Image" button in any content area and upload a picture.

There are also a variety of ways of including randomised or interactive
diagrams.

[See how to include an image](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/authoring/how-do-i.html#include-an-image)

---

## Use readable variable names!

Short names for question variables like `m` and `cf123` aren't much use when
you come back to fix or extend an old question.

Give variables readable names that tell you what they're for, such as
`num_people` or `initial_mass`. And always remember to fill out the
description field!

[Learn about valid variable names](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/jme-reference.html#variable-names)

---

## Display variables representing vectors and matrices in bold

Variable names used in the `\simplify` command be given annotations to change
how they are displayed.

For example, `vec:x` is rendered as $\vec{x}$.

[Read about variable name annotations](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/jme-reference.html#variable-name-annotations)

---

## Working with rounded numbers

Use `precround` and `siground` to round a number for use in further
calculations.

Use `dpformat` and `sigformat` to *display* a number to a certain precision;
these functions produce strings, so you can't use them for further
calculations.

[Read the documentation on `dpformat`](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/jme-reference.html#dpformat)

---

## Conditional visibility

Use the 'Conditional visibility' button in the text editor to only show a
block of text if a certain condition is satisfied.

You can use this to display different passages of text depending on the values of question
variables.

[See it in action](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/question/7711/conditional-visibility/)

---

## The random person extension

When writing a word problem involving named people, it's a good idea to use 
names that represent the whole population.

The 'random people' extension picks names based on UK birth data, so you don't
have to come up with your own.

[Read about the random person extension](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/extensions/46/documentation)

---

## Displaying amounts of money

It's not £2.1 and £0.03, it's £2.10 and 3p!

To display an amount of money in the right format, use the `currency`
function.

[Read more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/authoring/how-do-i.html#show-amounts-of-money-with-trailing-zeros)

---

## Display numbers with the right punctuation

Notation for numbers differs around the world. By default, Numbas shows
numbers with a dot for the decimal separator, and no thousands separator.

Use the `formatnumber` function to display a number in your chosen notation,
and the 'Allowed notation' setting in number entry parts so your students can
use it in their answers.

[Read about number notation](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/number-notation.html)

---

## Generating randomised LaTeX expressions

Use the `latex` function to mark a string as containing LaTeX notation, so
it's displayed properly.

[See an example](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/authoring/how-do-i.html#include-a-randomised-latex-command)

---

## Make sure your question variables satisfy a condition

If you need your question variables to have certain properties that you can't
guarantee through their definitions, use the 'Variable testing` field to write
the condition that they must satisfy.

Only sets of variables satisfying the condition will be shown to the student.

[Read about variable testing](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/reference.html#variable-testing)

---

## Assign several variables corresponding to a scenario

A simple way of randomising a question, particularly when working with 
real-world data, is to come up with a number of distinct scenarios. Use the 
`dictionary` data type to list the values of variables corresponding to each 
scenario, then pick randomly from a list of these dictionaries.

[See an example](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/question/26868/use-a-dictionary-to-set-several-variables-corresponding-to-a-scenario/)

---

## Give the student a hint

Give the student a hint in the form of a reminder of a formula, a reference to
their notes, or even a video using an information-only step.

You can apply an optional penalty to the student's score if they choose to
show the hint.

[Read about steps](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/reference.html#term-steps)

---

## Plan your question before you write it

Write questions better and more efficiently by planning them out before you
open the editor.

Think about what you want to assess, what you'll ask the student to do, and
how the question will be structured.

[Have a look at our guide on planning a question](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/authoring/planning-a-question.html)

---

## Pay attention to text formatting

Little things like mismatched fonts can make your question harder to read.

Make sure your use of text styling is consistent - use the 'Clear formatting' button
in the text editor to reset a block of text.

Always use LaTeX for mathematical expressions, but never for prose.

---

## Use LaTeX to display mathematics

Numbas uses LaTeX to typeset mathematical expressions, ensuring that they're
laid out correctly and accessible to screenreaders.

If you don't already know how to write LaTeX, it's easy to learn.

[Find out how to use LaTeX](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/latex.html)

---

## Use the LaTeX `\text` command to include words

If you need to include a full word such as "time spent" or "distance
travelled" in a LaTeX formula, use the `\text` command to display it using the
right font.

---

## Get someone else to check your questions

Try not to give questions to your students until someone else has checked them
over - it's easy not to notice mistakes or missing information in a question
you've just written.

Your collaborators can use the editor's feedback and commenting features to let you know if
they find any problems.

[Find out more about the collaboration features](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/tutorials/collaboration.html)

---

## Organise your material into folders

You can organise the content in your projects into folders to make it easier
to find.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/project/reference.html#organising-content-inside-a-project)

---

## Use projects to separate material for different purposes

Every question and exam in the Numbas editor belongs to a project.

Create a project to keep all the material for a particular course in
one place, and add in collaborators to grant automatic access to each other's
material.

[Learn about projects](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/project/reference.html#creating-a-new-project)

---

## Consider publishing your material

Anything you create on the Numbas editor is by default only visible to you.

If you can, consider publishing your questions and exams under a Creative
Commons licence so others can use them.

[Find out more to publish an item](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/reference.html#access)

---

## Give others access to your question

Anything you create on the Numbas editor is by default only visible to you and
any other members of the project it's in.

You can grant individual access to an item using the 'Access' tab.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/reference.html#access)

---

## Choose from a pool of questions

Each group of questions in an exam has a "Questions to use" field where you
can specify which questions are used.
You can use all the questions in your chosen order, in random order, or pick a
random subset.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/exam/reference.html#term-questions-to-use)

---

## Set a pass threshold for your exam

Use the exam's "Pass threshold" field to set a percentage score that the
student must achieve to pass.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/exam/reference.html#term-pass-threshold)

---

## Give feedback based on the student's total score

You can write a list of feedback messages corresponding to different score
thresholds.

The appropriate message is shown on the results page after the student has
finished the exam.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/exam/reference.html#term-feedback-messages)

---

## Write an introduction to your exam

Give the student any information they need before the exam starts, such as
timing and allowed equipment, using the 'Introduction' field.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/exam/reference.html#term-introduction)

---

## Change how Numbas looks with a theme

You can change how Numbas looks, from the colour scheme to the logo, or
completely redesign the interface.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/themes.html)

---

## Create printable assessments using the 'Printed worksheet' theme

The 'Printed worksheet' theme provides an interface to produce printable
copies of your exam, with separate answer sheets.

Each copy is randomised independently, so you can give each student a unique
worksheet.

[See an example](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/exam/3402/printed-worksheet/)

---

## Use Numbas in your language

Set your preferred language in your user profile, or change the "Interface
language" setting in your exams.

If Numbas hasn't been translated into your language yet, you can help!

[Find out more to help translate Numbas](https://www.numbas.org.uk/contributing-to-numbas/#numbas-in-your-own-language)

---

## Add a password to unlock the exam

For invigilated exams, it's a good idea to lock an exam with a password so
that students can't begin before they're allowed.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/exam/reference.html#term-password-to-begin-the-exam)

---

## Control the feedback students get

In credit-bearing assessments, you might not want the student to get any
feedback about their answers until they've finished the exam.

Use the exam's feedback settings to control whether they can see their scores
and other feedback. You might want to turn off the "generate another question
like this one" button too.

[Read about feedback options](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/exam/reference.html#feedback)

---

## Don't show the results page for final exams

If the result of an exam is subject to scaling, you don't want the student to
see their score before it's been moderated.

Use the "Show results page" option to control when the student sees their
results.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/exam/reference.html#term-show-results-page)

---

## Give questions descriptive names

A good question name describes what the student has to do.

For example, "Find the roots of a quadratic equation" is a good name, but
"algebra 1.3" is not.

You can use the 'Tags' field to add information such as which section of the
course the question corresponds to.

[Find out more to add tags](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/reference.html#term-tags)

---

## Group question variables

In the question editor you can organise variables into groups. Use groups to
collect together related variables - for example, you could put all random
values in one group and all the variables used for each part in their own
groups.

---

## Lock variables

While defining question variables, it can be helpful to fix the value of one
variable while you generate new values for the others.

Click the lock icon next to a variable's name to fix its value until you
unlock it again. Any variables that the locked variable depends on will also
be locked.

[Read about locking variables](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/reference.html#locking-variable-values)

---

## Which variables are randomised?

In the 'Variables' tab of the question editor, variables which have a random
element in their definitions have a 'shuffle' icon next to their names to make
them easier to find.

---

## Extensions add features to Numbas

There are many extensions available to use.

Extensions add new JME functions, data types, and integrations with other
software.

You can write your own extensions, too!

[Find out more to use extensions](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/reference.html#extensions)

---

## Change how a part is marked with a custom marking algorithm

If you want marking behaviour that isn't possible with the built-in options,
you can write a custom marking algorithm.

You can build off the existing algorithm for the part type you're using, so
you don't have to start from scratch.

[Read about custom marking algorithms](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/marking-algorithm.html)

---

## Add unit tests to question parts

Unit tests allow you to save the state of the marking algorithm after it has run, to confirm after making any changes to the part or question that the same behaviour is produced.

Find them in the 'Marking algorithm' tab.

[Read about unit tests](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/reference.html#unit-tests)

---

## Allow error-carried forward marking

If a student makes an error in their answer to part **a**, which they have to
use to find their answer for part **b**, you might think it's unfair to
penalise them twice.

Use adaptive marking to recalculate the correct answer for subsequent parts as
if the student's answer was correct, so they'll be given credit for following
the correct method.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/reference.html#adaptive-marking)

---

## Assess lab work using adaptive marking

You can use the adaptive marking feature to ask students to enter data at the
beginning of a question and then use it to set up the expected answers for the
rest of the question.

[See an example](https://numbas.mathcentre.ac.uk/question/52463/experiment-proof-of-concept/)

---

## Use a pattern restrictions on mathematical expression parts

If you want the student to enter a mathematical expression in a certain form,
you can add a _pattern restriction_.

You can apply a penalty or award no marks at all if the student's answer isn't
in the form you want.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/mathematical-expression.html#pattern-restriction)

---

## Disallow unexepected variables in mathematical expression parts

Students frequently forget to put a multiplication symbol between the names of
variables. Numbas interprets a string of letters as a single variable.

Use the 'Warn if student uses an unexpected variable name' option to warn the
student when this happens.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/mathematical-expression.html#term-warn-if-student-uses-an-unexpected-variable-name)

---

## Take care when marking equations

Mathematical expression parts are marked by comparing the values produced by
the student's answer and the expected answer. For equations, these are always
'true' or 'false', which can lead to false positives.

Use the 'Variable value generators' fields to set up the chosen values to
check for true equality.

[Find out more about marking equations](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/mathematical-expression.html#marking-an-equation)

---

## Use a precision restriction in number entry parts

If you want the student to give their answer to a certain precision, don't
round off the correct answer: instead, set a precision restriction so you
don't get caught out by edge cases.

[Find out more about precision restrictions](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/numberentry.html#term-precision-restriction)

---

## Use scientific notation for very large or very small numbers

Tick the box for 'Scientific' notation in a number entry part's 'Allowed
notation' field so the student can enter numbers like `1.2e100` $ = 1.2 \times
10^{100}$.

[Read about number notation](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/number-notation.html#number-notation)

---

## Ask the student to choose from a drop-down box

"Choose one from a list" parts can be displayed as a drop-down selector instead of
a series of radio boxes.

[Find out how](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/multiple-choice.html#term-selection-type)

---

## Display choices in columns

If you've got a lot of choices in a multiple-choice part, make them line up by
setting a number of display columns.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/multiple-choice.html#term-number-of-display-columns)

---

## Custom marking matrices

You can make the marking matrix for a multiple-choice part depend on question
variables by setting a _custom marking matrix_. This is a list or array giving
the number of marks to award for each choice.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/multiple-choice.html#term-custom-marking-matrix)

---

## Change the layout of a "match choices with answers" part.

You can remove some choice/answer pairs from a "match choices with answers"
part. For example, if the grid is symmetric, you can save the student some
time by only showing the lower or upper triangle of options.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/multiple-choice.html#term-layout)

---

## Write tailored feedback for each choice in a multiple-choice part

In "choose one from a list" and "choose several from a list" parts, you can
write a 'distractor' message for each choice, which is shown in the feedback
when the student selects that choice.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/multiple-choice.html#term-distractor-message)

---

## Randomise the available choices in a multiple-choice part

If the number of choices available depends on the value of a question
variable, you can give a variable list of choices.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/question/parts/multiple-choice.html#term-variable-list-of-choices)

---

## Take care when substituting values into mathematical expressions

Substituting values into a mathematical expression isn't simple - that's what
the `\simplify` command is for.

Always use `\simplify` when randomising mathematical expressions, so the final
result looks 'human'.

[Read about substituting variables into maths](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/simplification.html)

---

## Specify how mathematical expressions are simplified

The `\simplify` command has a library of rules it uses to rearrange
expressions. Sometimes you don't want to use them all. Fortunately, you can
specify which rules can be applied.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/simplification.html#id1)

---

## Specify how fractions are displayed

You can tell the `\simplify` command to render all numbers as fractions,
top-heavy fractions in mixed form, or to display fractions flat on one line.

[Find out more](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/simplification.html#display-options)

---

## Check out the tutorials

If you haven't already, make sure you work through the "Getting Started" tutorials in the
documentation.

[Get started](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/tutorials/write-question.html)

---

## Stuck? Ask for help

If you've got a problem you can't solve on your own, ask for help on the
Numbas users mailing list.

[Join the group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/numbas-users)

---

## Think about accessibility

Don't make your tests inaccessible to students using assistive technology.
Make sure images have alternative text, and don't rely on purely visual
elements such as colour to convey information.

Numbas is regularly tested against a variety of accessibility requirements.

[Read Numbas' accessibility statement](https://docs.numbas.org.uk/en/latest/accessibility/exam.html)
